Even with a career steeped in healthcare information, Josh Schoeller still learnt plenty when he was unexpectedly propelled onto the frontline. In his second week as president of Elsevier’s clinical solutions division, he took an urgent flight north to Minneapolis where his father had been taken into hospital suffering with a serious spine infection. During the journey, Schoeller read 50 pages generated by his new team at ClinicalKey on his dad’s condition and, when he arrived, pressed for him to go straight into surgery rather than sticking with the initially prescribed course of antibiotics. “It used to be that no one questioned the doctor, right?” he says. “Today, two-thirds of every physician’s encounter is correlated to questions generated from the patient or their advocates.” Time-pressed doctors face the challenge of dealing with concerned relatives clutching their own research as well as making sure they refer to the latest academic thinking when tackling an emergency. Complexity is everywhere. People are living longer with multiple conditions. And the total amount of medical research that was doubling about every 50 years in 1950 took only 73 days to do the same by 2020. That explains why Elsevier, part of RELX, launched a new version of its ClinicalKey in several markets including the US in August 2021. Clinicians can still read deeply on any given condition and consult 4.8m images and more than 66,000 videos, but Schoeller’s team have also overlaid summaries digested by 150 experts for quicker reference through a cleaner, colour-coded web interface accessible on handheld devices at the point of care. The product improvement was typical of RELX: a key element of its strategy is a deep understanding of its customers’ needs. The new ClinicalKey emerged from dozens of collaboration with users at more than 40 US hospitals and design partners from across the globe. So much talking and experimenting got to the crux of the problem. From case to case, busy clinicians have just one minute to search for information and four minutes to consume it – before they begin the hunt for solutions. RELX does make occasional targeted acquisitions, but the main focus of the company’s strategy is to grow organically. Even in the year Covid-19 struck, the group maintained its average spend of five percent of revenues into organic investment, worth circa £350m. This steady, day-to-day improvement has helped transform RELX over the past two decades. In 2000, just 22 percent of revenues were electronic. Today, that number is 86 percent. Continuous innovation has helped the company’s shares out-perform the FTSE100 for eleven consecutive years. Some of the organic investment used to be spent on digitising print properties. But now the focus is on leveraging analytics and machine learning, and adding extra data sets to develop sophisticated decision and analytics tools. RELX’s professional customers - from doctors and lawyers to insurers and risk professionals assessing fraud and financial crime risk - are in pursuit of better results and quicker, smarter decision. “People like talking about disruption, but we prefer the concept of continuous innovation,” says Jelena Sevo, RELX’s chief strategy officer, who previously held various senior management roles in Elsevier and LexisNexis. She sets the tone but expects the group’s industry experts to decide where investment is needed. Tracking opportunities and pinch points involves understanding the objectives and outcomes of its customers – and RELX’s technology infrastructure means it is easy to try something out and quickly assess the results.
